== 2020-07-22 NOTES

What is Event-Driven?
This keys off the Fowler post (1):

 * Event Notification (EN)
   * just an alert, you need to go back for data
 * Event-Carried State (ECS)
   * all the data in every alert
 * Event Sourcing (ES)
   * "accounting" style transactions
 * CQRS
   * reads/write separated 

The last two are the ones that seem to be important for design discussions (esp. for translating a RESTful desgin into an Eventful one). 

Seems to me the main contenders in Eventful style are ES and CQRS. the other two (EN/ECS are just notifications (not customer reads, not writes)>

ES is easy to start and scales (essentially uses Kafka to handle transactions) and is optimized to writes (not reads). The challeenge comes when you want to read anything. you proly need both a read schema to apply to the data store and a sophisticated data store that can assemble the most recent edition of the records for output. One way to solve this is to have periodic ETL-type runs against the transaction data that is then stored in a relational DB optimized to reads. This is the essence of eventual consistency and the debate can center on how often you run the ETL work. 

CQRS separates write and read models and (in theory) makes it easier to read data (over the ES model). In theory, this reduces the challenge for ETL work. writes are handled directly to the DB and events are burped out as source data (the DB) changes. Queries are sent to a read-only version of the DB (that has already been "ETL-edd", too. Seem events are reduced to EN/ECS here?

So, the question is: If you're creating a generalized architecture for your company, what do you do? Is your work primarily how to handle the stream<->schema problem (updating SQL w/ ETLs against Kafka)?. Is there something else (that scales)?

And that's all before we get into the gateway/routing mimic that we rely upon in a RESTful world[grin].





=== Reference List

 * (1) : https://martinfowler.com/articles/201701-event-driven.html

